README.md, before:

# Database fundamentals: Understanding RDBMS

## The purpose of RDBMS
- Collect & store related data
- Organize data into logical structures
- Data can be stored as tables & relations
- Fields can be used to store values
- Easily query the stored data
- Easily analyze stored data
- Allows real-time online data processing (OLTP)
- Data is consistently updated
- Short & fast inserts & updates
- Speed is fast
- Data is highly normalized
- Easily define schemas & sub-schemas
- Easily establish relationships between DB elements
- Provides the ability of independence of data from programs
- Provides backup & recovery features

## Popular RDBMS
#### Oracle
- High performance
- Spawn multiple database instances – instance caging
- 100% uptime – high availability
- Excellent backup & recovery features with low recovery time
- Highly secure

#### SQL Server 
- Insights from a data estate
- Multiplatform support
- High performance
- Allows easy data classification, protection & monitoring
- High availability
- Cloud-based
- Highly scalable
- Hybridization – part of database could be in cloud
- The software even tries to fix malicious activity if detected

#### MySQL
- Open source although owned by Oracle
- 2 licensing models – community, enterprise version
- **ACID** – Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability
- **Multimodal** – can support structured (based on SQL) & semi-structured data (based on JSON)
- Scalable & fast
- Memory based
- Built on client-server architecture
- Transactional
- Supports large databases
- **MySQL HeatWave** – In-memory query accelerator – designed for fast execution of queries, analytical & transactional queries

#### PostgreSQL
- Completely open-source
- Very good reliability & active community
- ACID
- Triggers can be programmed
- Stored procedures can be programmed
- We can modify source code
- Provides immediate consistency on a single server

## Feature history of Oracle DBMS
- Created by Larry Ellison
- Application clusters, advanced queuing, data-mining, streams
- Automated DB management, grid infrastructure & online indexing
- Transparent data encryption
- Active data guard, secure files, exit data, data reduction
- Multi-tenant architecture, in-memory column store, support for JSON
- Active directory integration
- Online merging of partitions & sub-partitions
- Automatic index creation, real-time statistics maintenance, SQL queries on object stores
- In-memory for IoT data stream
- Support for blockchain tables, self-managing in-memory features
- Sharding advisor tools, property graph visualization, automatic zone maps

## Oracle’s future
Customers are slowly shifting to cloud databases but Oracle made the jump a bit too late. It’s hard for companies on Oracle to jump. They are working on their 2nd generation of cloud services to catch up with the competition.

## Features of SQL Server
- Networking features
- Replication
- Query analyzer, OLAP – using which SQL could be extended
- Stored procedures
- OLAP replaced by Analysis services
- XML support, user-defined fns, indexed views, log shipping, replication enhancements
- SQL Server Management Studio
- Business Intelligence Development Studio
- Create customized audits & monitor data warehouse
- Replaced BI tools with SQL Server Data tools
- Enhanced clustering features
- Ease of integration into Azure cloud
- Memory optimized tables
- **PolyBase** – query noSQL data i.e, JSON, CSV files etc. – made archiving a lot easier
- Complete support for Linux, Python

## MySQL Features
- Fast & stable
- Good optimization
- Transactional capabilities
- Supported prepared statements
- Stored procedures, server-side cursors, triggers, views, XA transaction
- Data partitioning, row-based replication, event scheduler

## Database terminology
- *Relational database* – database objects are related
- *Database instances* – same database, several manifestations so several people can work on it at the same time
- *In-memory* – database which is in working memory
- *Table* – collection of related columns & rows
- *Record* – a row in a table
- *Primary key* – way of identifying each record using one or a combination of columns
- Different relationship types
  - One-to-many – records in 1 table match one or more in another table
  - One-to-one – records in 1 table match those in 1 other table
- *SQL* – standardized language used to query data in tables
- *Query* – obtain values stored in fields of a table
- *Recordset* – result of a specific query
- *Join* – special query to merge data from several different tables
- *Referential integrity* – foreign key in one table matches rows in the main table
- *DDL* – Data Definition Language, refers to database schema & descriptions
- *DML* – Data Manipulation Language, includes statements like UPDATE, INSERT, DELETE etc.
- *DCL* – Data Control Language – commands to control database access
- *Locking* – restrict multiple users manipulating the same record at the same time
= *Rollback* – reverse all changes made by SQL statements
- *Atomicity* – a single cell can’t contain multiple values, or, 1 transaction must be done completely, parts of a transaction can’t be successful & the rest can’t fail the whole thing has to run or nothing runs

## Normalization of data
It’s a Data organization process. We breakdown the data into related group & each group will have it’s separate table & then we define the rules & relationships between tables. 
This improves database flexibility & organization.

*Normal forms* – measure depth of normalization

#### 1 NF – 
- eliminate repletion of data
- separate tables for sets of related data
- use primary keys
#### 2NF
- Separate tables for values that apply to multiple records
- Use of foreign/compound keys
#### 3NF
- Elimination of fields that are not dependent on the key

Eg: A customers can have multiple orders. Instead of having a single table that stores customer details along with order details, store customer info in 1 table & order info. This is 1NF. In another & have a foreign key that points to customers. This is 2NF. We see that we are storing Zip code, City & street name of customer but realize we can get all these things from Zip code so we remove City & other fields that can be derived from Zip code.



- EF Codd – developed the relational model of data representation

Before Codd, DBs were laregely unorganized & didn’t have a theoretical foundation. He used mathematical logic to come up with relational data models & also came up with the first abstract data model.

Commit message:

added boyce-codd normal form

README.md, after:

# Database fundamentals: Understanding RDBMS

## The purpose of RDBMS
- Collect & store related data
- Organize data into logical structures
- Data can be stored as tables & relations
- Fields can be used to store values
- Easily query the stored data
- Easily analyze stored data
- Allows real-time online data processing (OLTP)
- Data is consistently updated
- Short & fast inserts & updates
- Speed is fast
- Data is highly normalized
- Easily define schemas & sub-schemas
- Easily establish relationships between DB elements
- Provides the ability of independence of data from programs
- Provides backup & recovery features

## Popular RDBMS
#### Oracle
- High performance
- Spawn multiple database instances – instance caging
- 100% uptime – high availability
- Excellent backup & recovery features with low recovery time
- Highly secure

#### SQL Server 
- Insights from a data estate
- Multiplatform support
- High performance
- Allows easy data classification, protection & monitoring
- High availability
- Cloud-based
- Highly scalable
- Hybridization – part of database could be in cloud
- The software even tries to fix malicious activity if detected

#### MySQL
- Open source although owned by Oracle
- 2 licensing models – community, enterprise version
- **ACID** – Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability
- **Multimodal** – can support structured (based on SQL) & semi-structured data (based on JSON)
- Scalable & fast
- Memory based
- Built on client-server architecture
- Transactional
- Supports large databases
- **MySQL HeatWave** – In-memory query accelerator – designed for fast execution of queries, analytical & transactional queries

#### PostgreSQL
- Completely open-source
- Very good reliability & active community
- ACID
- Triggers can be programmed
- Stored procedures can be programmed
- We can modify source code
- Provides immediate consistency on a single server

## Feature history of Oracle DBMS
- Created by Larry Ellison
- Application clusters, advanced queuing, data-mining, streams
- Automated DB management, grid infrastructure & online indexing
- Transparent data encryption
- Active data guard, secure files, exit data, data reduction
- Multi-tenant architecture, in-memory column store, support for JSON
- Active directory integration
- Online merging of partitions & sub-partitions
- Automatic index creation, real-time statistics maintenance, SQL queries on object stores
- In-memory for IoT data stream
- Support for blockchain tables, self-managing in-memory features
- Sharding advisor tools, property graph visualization, automatic zone maps

## Oracle’s future
Customers are slowly shifting to cloud databases but Oracle made the jump a bit too late. It’s hard for companies on Oracle to jump. They are working on their 2nd generation of cloud services to catch up with the competition.

## Features of SQL Server
- Networking features
- Replication
- Query analyzer, OLAP – using which SQL could be extended
- Stored procedures
- OLAP replaced by Analysis services
- XML support, user-defined fns, indexed views, log shipping, replication enhancements
- SQL Server Management Studio
- Business Intelligence Development Studio
- Create customized audits & monitor data warehouse
- Replaced BI tools with SQL Server Data tools
- Enhanced clustering features
- Ease of integration into Azure cloud
- Memory optimized tables
- **PolyBase** – query noSQL data i.e, JSON, CSV files etc. – made archiving a lot easier
- Complete support for Linux, Python

## MySQL Features
- Fast & stable
- Good optimization
- Transactional capabilities
- Supported prepared statements
- Stored procedures, server-side cursors, triggers, views, XA transaction
- Data partitioning, row-based replication, event scheduler

## Database terminology
- *Relational database* – database objects are related
- *Database instances* – same database, several manifestations so several people can work on it at the same time
- *In-memory* – database which is in working memory
- *Table* – collection of related columns & rows
- *Record* – a row in a table
- *Primary key* – way of identifying each record using one or a combination of columns
- Different relationship types
  - One-to-many – records in 1 table match one or more in another table
  - One-to-one – records in 1 table match those in 1 other table
- *SQL* – standardized language used to query data in tables
- *Query* – obtain values stored in fields of a table
- *Recordset* – result of a specific query
- *Join* – special query to merge data from several different tables
- *Referential integrity* – foreign key in one table matches rows in the main table
- *DDL* – Data Definition Language, refers to database schema & descriptions
- *DML* – Data Manipulation Language, includes statements like UPDATE, INSERT, DELETE etc.
- *DCL* – Data Control Language – commands to control database access
- *Locking* – restrict multiple users manipulating the same record at the same time
= *Rollback* – reverse all changes made by SQL statements
- *Atomicity* – a single cell can’t contain multiple values, or, 1 transaction must be done completely, parts of a transaction can’t be successful & the rest can’t fail the whole thing has to run or nothing runs

## Normalization of data
It’s a Data organization process. We breakdown the data into related group & each group will have it’s separate table & then we define the rules & relationships between tables. 
This improves database flexibility & organization.

*Normal forms* – measure depth of normalization

#### 1 NF – 
- eliminate repletion of data
- separate tables for sets of related data
- use primary keys
#### 2NF
- Separate tables for values that apply to multiple records
- Use of foreign/compound keys
#### 3NF
- Elimination of fields that are not dependent on the key

Eg: A customers can have multiple orders. Instead of having a single table that stores customer details along with order details, store customer info in 1 table & order info. This is 1NF. In another & have a foreign key that points to customers. This is 2NF. We see that we are storing Zip code, City & street name of customer but realize we can get all these things from Zip code so we remove City & other fields that can be derived from Zip code.

#### Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF) a.k.a 3.5 NF
- The DB must already be in 3NF
- The form refers to dependency of objects
- If 1 column implies another, then one of these columns must be super key of the other

In this relationship A->B, A implies B so B is dependent on A, therefore A has to be a super key.

- EF Codd – developed the relational model of data representation

Before Codd, DBs were laregely unorganized & didn’t have a theoretical foundation. He used mathematical logic to come up with relational data models & also came up with the first abstract data model.
